1. Flake size: Among our limited sample, EMSA Levallois ﬂakes are smaller
than Acheulian Levallois ﬂakes (see Fig. 5), although there is considerable
variation and some overlap in size between MSA ﬂakes from Koimilot
Locus 2 and Acheulian ﬂakes from LHA. EMSA ﬂakes range from 5.3 to
13.9 cm in length as measured from the striking platform along the axis
of percussion; Acheulian examples vary from 10.4 to 22.8 cm in length.
2. Appearance of recurrent methods: Acheulian Levallois ﬂakes from LHA
and FS were produced exclusively by the preferential method, while both
preferential and recurrent methods are present in the MSA assemblages
from Koimilot. The use of recurrent methods allows for the production
of a greater number of Levallois ﬂakes per core, and can be argued to
be a more efﬁcient ﬂake production strategy. However, recurrent methods
are impractical, if not impossible, for the production of large ﬂakes of
the size of those found at the Kapthurin Formation Acheulian sites. The
required cores would be too large for the controlled preparatory ﬂaking
needed to shape the Levallois surface. The preferential method is likely
required if Acheulian Levallois cleaver ﬂakes are the desired end product.
The appearance of recurrent methods at MSA sites may thus be related to
the need for small ﬂake blanks, rather than to raw material economy.
3. Raw materials: Acheulian Levallois ﬂakes were made almost entirely of
a single variety of phonolitic lava, whereas the EMSA material shows use
of wider range of lavas, some of them ﬁner grained. Comparable shifts
to a reliance on ﬁne-grained or vitreous raw materials is a characteristic that has been found to distinguish Acheulian and MSA assemblages
at a number of other localities throughout Africa (Clark, 1980, 2001a;
Merrick et al., 1994; Raynal et al., 2001). To an extent, some ﬁne-grained
raw materials are better suited to Levallois ﬂake production than others,
and they may allow the full expression of the variability inherent in Levallois ﬂake production (Jaubert and Farizy, 1995). However, functional
contrasts provide an alternate explanation for the observed differences in
raw material. African Acheulian implements are typically made of durable
rocks, and are effective for a range of tasks because of their long cutting
edges, large sizes, and substantial weights (e.g., Jones, 1994; Noll, 2000).
The shift to ﬁner-grained raw materials that hold a sharper edge, seen
at MSA sites, may represent a design choice more suitable for the manufacture of smaller, lighter tools. The combination of hafting and sharp
edges may compensate for reduced size, although considerable research
remains to be done on raw material properties, reasons for the selection