The other unmodiﬁed large ﬂakes exhibit a different ﬂaking
modality. Six large ﬂakes that belong to multifacial multidirectional
irregular cores bear multidirectional large ﬂake scars on the dorsal
face and display a thick triangular cross-section (core edge ﬂakes)
and wide, thick plain or dihedral butts. Two of these ﬂakes exhibit a
natural, distal, backed edge that corresponds to the core’s other face
(Fig. 16: 8). In the case of large ﬂakes with natural butts and a
natural-backed distal edge, the length of the ﬂake corresponds to
one of the core’s three dimensions. The dimensions of these ﬂakes
(101e143 mm; 49e80 mm; 27e46 mm) do not indicate a departure
from the multidirectional ﬂakes assigned to small débitage (Fig. 13),
which demonstrates that the production of this type of ﬂake, both
large and small medium, can be assigned to a single chaîne opératoire. This statement is further corroborated by the fact that no
LCTs were produced from this ﬂake blank type.
Lavas In contrast to obsidian, more than half of the components of
this chaîne opératoire are represented by cores (n ¼ 36), whereby
large ﬂakes account for 29 specimens and LCTs account for ﬁve.
Additionally, there is a clear relationship between large core débitage and particular raw materials within the lava group, i.e.,
porphyritic rocks (21 cores), in particular porphyritic basalt, and
Melka Fault lava (nine cores), despite the quantity of these raw
materials within the entire collection being low compared with
aphyric to subaphyric basalts and differentiated aphyric to subaphyric lavas (Fig. 5). Six cores are of aphyric to subaphyric basalts
(n ¼ 2), microdoleritic basalt (n ¼ 3) and obsidianic lava (n ¼ 1).
This preference is conﬁrmed by large ﬂakes (12 of porphyritic
rocks, nine of Melka Fault lava, seven of aphyric to subaphyric
basalts, and one of trachybasalt) and LCTs (three of porphyritic
basalt and two of Melka Fault lava). Porphyritic rocks and Melka
Fault lava compact facies also occur less frequently in alluvial
deposits. However, their largest forms are more frequent than
those of aphyric rocks. It seems that the choice of these raw
materials was inﬂuenced by the need to access large cobbles that
would be ideal cores for detaching LCT blanks rather than the
selection of speciﬁc lithological properties.