The analysis of Acheulian and MSA Levallois technology presented here
complements our prior research on the Acheulian-MSA transition in the Kapthurin
Formation, which has focused on the sequence of diagnostic tool types (e.g.,
handaxes, cleavers, and points). Sites containing diagnostic tools have been
ordered stratigraphically on the basis of tephra correlation (McBrearty, 2001;
McBrearty and Tryon, 2005; Tryon, 2003, 2006a; Tryon and McBrearty, 2002;
Tryon and McBrearty, 2006). Our cumulative results may now be summarized
as follows. (1) The earliest points date to >284 ka. (2) As described here, Levallois technology has an Acheulian origin. MSA variants are an elaboration of
local technological antecedents. (3) Retouched points and Levallois ﬂake production, elements that typically deﬁne MSA lithic technology, do no co-occur in
all Kapthurin Formation MSA assemblages. (4) Handaxe and cleaver production
persists after the introduction of points. These observations suggest that aspects
considered the hallmarks of the MSA, including formal tools such as points, and
the means of ﬂake production, including Levallois methods, represent two independent elements of hominin tool-assisted adaptive behavior, each having its own
distinct history of development (e.g., Bo¨eda, 1991; Goren-Inbar and Belfer-Cohen,
1998). The Kapthurin Formation evidence also illustrates the methodological challenge in pinning down the precise timing of the Acheulian to Middle Stone Age
transition, which we view as a process rather than an event. Our results suggest a
mosaic or incremental pattern of change, and possibly, the geographic and temporal
overlap of distinct artifact industries within a single depositional basin (cf. Chase
and Dibble, 1990; Clark, 1999; McBrearty et al., 1996). Similar spatial and chronological overlap among Acheulian and post-Acheulian industries has also been reported from assemblages on Sai Island, in the Nile Valley of Sudan, dated by OSL
on sand to between 182 ± 20 and 223 ± 19 ka (Van Peer et al., 2003, 2004).